Hi, it's Wojciech Lesniak.
Welcome to this module on Outsourcing Authentication with OpenID and OAuth2.
To speed up the registration process and simplify authentication for the user,
many sites outsource authentication to third parties,
like Facebook, Google, or Okta.
This is done through OAuth.
And the way it works is there are generally three actors,
the user, let's call her Victoria, the client,
our web application, Crypto Portfolio,
the resource server where the user's profile is stored,
in this case Google.
Our portfolio site is a client of Google and has a client ID and a secret,
which it shares with Google, so Google can identify the web application.
Now Victoria wants to monitor her holdings using the Crypto Portfolio site.
Before she can do that, she needs to be authenticated.
The site gives her the ability to register and log in.
However, we can also give her another option to authenticate with a third party,
like Google.
Victoria is already registered with Google and decides on the
easy route of selecting sign in with Google.
She is then redirected to the Google's authentication page,
and the client ID is included in the redirect.
She authenticates with Google, and as the resource owner of her data,
Google asks if she gives the client, Crypto Portfolio,
authority to access the following data from her profile in Google.
If she authorizes the client,
then Google will send a redirect to her browser back to the client's server
with the auth code that is encrypted with the secret key.
The user's browser will then forward the request to the
client with the encrypted auth code.
The client will decrypt the auth code with the secret key
known only to the client and Google.
The client will then the auth code to Google,
and Google will validate it and respond back with an access token.
The access token can be used to retrieve the authorized user
profile data to identify and authenticate the user,
giving them access to their portfolio.
OAuth is not actually designed for authentication, but for authorization.
In the past,
many providers like Google and Facebook have customized
it to perform authentication securely.
Due to the popularity of sign in with OAuth,
this has resulted in each provider having different
implementations of OAuth for authentication.
Hence,
you would need to know each provider's implementation to add it to your site.
OpenID Connect builds on top of OAuth.
It is a specification that attempts to standardize
authentication with OAuth so that you don't need to know the
details of the authentication provider.
But it is not yet widely adopted by everybody,
and you often hear the names used interchangeably.
Often providers will still use the name OAuth,
even though they're using OpenID Connect.
This can be a lot to take in.
Fortunately, Spring Security does most of the work for us.
It has out-of-the-box support for Google,
GitHub, Facebook, and Okta, some using OAuth2,
some OpenID. So let's sign in with Google.